The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir of a Brother, by Thomas Hughes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Memoir of a Brother

Author: Thomas Hughes

Release Date: January 31, 2019 [EBook #58795]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIR OF A BROTHER ***




Produced by WebRover, Peter Vachuska, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










[Illustration: _Engraved by C.H. Jeens from a Picture by G.F. Watts._]




                          MEMOIR OF A BROTHER.

                                   BY
                             THOMAS HUGHES,
                   AUTHOR OF “TOM BROWN’S SCHOOLDAYS.”

                             [Illustration]

                                 BOSTON:
                      JAMES R. OSGOOD AND COMPANY,
            LATE TICKNOR & FIELDS, AND FIELDS, OSGOOD, & CO.
                                  1873.

                           _AUTHOR’S EDITION._




PREFACE.


This Memoir was written for, and at the request of, the near relatives,
and intimate friends, of the home-loving country gentleman, whose
unlooked-for death had made them all mourners indeed. Had it been meant
originally for publication, it would have taken a very different form. In
compiling it, my whole thoughts were fixed on my own sons and nephews,
and not on the public. It tells of a life with which indeed the public
has no concern in one sense; for my brother, with all his ability and
power of different kinds, was one of the humblest and most retiring
of men; who just did his own duty, and held his own tongue, without
the slightest effort or wish for fame or notoriety of any kind. In
another sense, however, I do see that it has a meaning and interest for
Englishmen in general, and have therefore consented to its publication in
the usual way, though not without a sense of discomfort and annoyance at
having the veil even partially lifted from the intimacies of a private
family circle. For, in a noisy and confused time like ours, it does seem
to me that most of us have need to be reminded of, and will be the better
for bearing in mind, the reserve of strength and power which lies quietly
at the nation’s call, outside the whirl and din of public and fashionable
life, and entirely ignored in the columns of the daily press. The subject
of this memoir was only a good specimen of thousands of Englishmen of
high culture, high courage, high principle, who are living their own
quiet lives in every corner of the kingdom, from John o’ Groat’s to the
Land’s-End, bringing up their families in the love of God and their
neighbour, and keeping the atmosphere around them clean, and pure and
strong, by their example,—men who would come to the front, and might be
relied on, in any serious national crisis.

One is too apt to fancy, from the photographs of the nation’s life which
one gets day by day, that the old ship has lost the ballast which has
stood her in such good stead for a thousand years, and is rolling more
and more helplessly, in a gale which shows no sign of abating, for
her or any other national vessel, until at last she must roll over and
founder. But it is not so. England is in less stress, and in better trim,
than she has been in in many a stiffer gale.

The real fact is, that nations, and the families of which nations are
composed, make no parade or fuss over that part of their affairs which
is going right. National life depends on home life, and foreign critics
are inclined to take the chronicles of our Divorce Court as a test by
which to judge the standard of our home life, like the old gentleman who
always spelt through the police reports to see “what the people were
about.” An acquaintance, however, with any average English neighbourhood,
or any dozen English families taken at random, ought to be sufficient to
reassure the faint-hearted, and to satisfy them that (to use the good
old formula) the Lord has much work yet for this nation to do, and the
nation manliness and godliness enough left to do it all, notwithstanding
superficial appearances.

A life without sensation or incident may therefore well form a more
useful subject of study in such a time, than the most exciting narrative
of adventure and success, the conditions being, that it shall have been
truly lived, and faithfully told. Readers will judge for themselves
whether the former condition has been fulfilled in this case: I wish I
could feel the same confidence as to the latter. I can only say I have
done my best.

                                                                    T. H.




Dedication.

_TO MY NEPHEWS AND SONS._


MY DEAR BOYS,

It has pleased God to take to Himself the head of the family of which you
are members. Most of you are too young to enter into the full meaning
of those words “family” and “membership,” but you all remember with
sore hearts, and the deepest feeling of love and reverence, the gentle,
strong, brave man, whom you used to call father or uncle; and who had
that wonderful delight in, and attraction for, young folk, which most
very gentle and brave men have. You are conscious, I know, that a great
cold chasm has suddenly opened in your lives—that strength and help
has gone away from you, to which you knew you might turn in any of the
troubles which boys, and very young men, feel so keenly. Well, I am glad
that you feel that it is so: I should not have much hope of you if it
were otherwise. The chasm will close up, and you will learn, I trust and
pray, where to go for strength and help, in this and all other troubles.

It is very little that I can do for you. Probably you can do more for me;
and my need is even sorer than yours. But what I can do I will. Several
of you have asked me questions about your father and uncle, what we used
to do, and think and talk about, when he and I were boys together. Well,
no one can answer these questions better than I, for we were as nearly of
an age as brothers can be—I was only thirteen months younger—and we were
companions from our childhood. We went together to our first school, when
I was nearly eight and he nine years old; and then on to Rugby together;
and were never separated for more than a week until he went to Oxford,
where I followed a year later. For the first part of my time there, in
college, we lived in the same rooms, always on the same staircase; and
afterwards in the same lodgings. From that time to the day of his death
we lived in the most constant intimacy and affection. Looking back over
all those years, I can call to mind no single unkind, or unworthy, or
untruthful, act or word of his; and amongst all the good influences for
which I have to be thankful, I reckon the constant presence and example
of his brave, generous, and manly life as one of the most powerful and
ennobling. If I can in any measure reproduce it for you, I know that
I shall be doing you a good service; and helping you, in even more
difficult times than those in which we grew up, to quit yourselves as
brave and true English boys and Englishmen, in whatever work or station
God may be pleased to call you to.

You have all been taught to look to one life as your model, and to
turn to Him who lived it on our earth, as to the guide, and friend,
and helper, who alone can strengthen the feeble knees, and lift up the
fainting heart. Just in so far as you cleave to that teaching, and
follow that life, will you live your own faithfully. If I were not sure
that what I am going to try to do for you would help to turn you more
trustfully and lovingly to that source of all truth, all strength, all
light, be sure I would not have undertaken it. As it is, I know it will
be my fault if it does not do this.

                                                           THOMAS HUGHES.




CONTENTS.


                                    PAGE

              CHAPTER I.

    FIRST YEARS                        1

              CHAPTER II.

    RUGBY                             17

             CHAPTER III.

    A FATHER’S LETTERS                49

              CHAPTER IV.

    OXFORD                            59

              CHAPTER V.

    DEGREE                            80

              CHAPTER VI.

    START IN LIFE                     88

             CHAPTER VII.

    1849-50: AN EPISODE              109

             CHAPTER VIII.

    ITALY                            121

              CHAPTER IX.

    MIDDLE LIFE                      130

              CHAPTER X.

    LETTERS TO HIS BOYS              151

              CHAPTER XI.

    CONCLUSION                       170




MEMOIR OF A BROTHER.




CHAPTER I.

_FIRST YEARS._


My brother was born on the 18th of September, 1821 at Uffington, in
Berkshire, of which your great-grandfather was vicar. Uffington was then
a very primitive village, far away from any high road, and seven miles
from Wantage, the nearest town from which a coach ran to London. There
were very few neighbours, the roads were almost impassable for carriages
in the winter, and the living was a poor one; but your great-grandfather
(who was a Canon of St. Paul’s) had exchanged a much richer living for
it, because his wife had been born there, and was deeply attached to
the place. Three George Watts’s had been vicars of Uffington, in direct
succession from father to son, and she was the daughter of the last of
them. So your grandfather, who was their only child, came to live in the
village on his marriage, in an old farmhouse close to the church, to
which your grandfather added some rooms, so as to make it habitable. If
you should ever make a pilgrimage to the place, you will not find the
house, for it has been pulled down; but the grand old church is there,
and White Horse Hill, rising just behind the village, just as they were
half a century ago, when we first looked at them. We could see the church
from our bed-room window, and the hill from our nursery, a queer upper
room amongst the rafters, at the top of the old part of the house, with a
dark closet in one corner, into which the nurses used to put us when we
were more unruly than usual. Here we lived till your great-grandfather’s
death, thirteen years later, when your grandfather removed to his house
at Donnington.

The memories of our early childhood and boyhood throng upon me, so that
I scarcely know where to begin, or what to leave out. I cannot, however,
I am sure, go wrong in telling you, how I became first aware of a great
difference between us, and of the effect the discovery had on me. In the
spring of 1828, when he was seven and I six years old, our father and
mother were away from home for a few days. We were, playing together in
the garden, when the footman came up to us, the old single-barrelled gun
over his shoulder which the gardener had for driving away birds from the
strawberries, and asked us whether we shouldn’t like to go rook-shooting.
We jumped at the offer, and trotted along by his side to the rookery,
some 300 yards from the house. As we came up we saw a small group of our
friends under the trees—the groom, the village schoolmaster, and a farmer
or two—and started forwards to greet them. Just before we got to the
trees, some of them began firing up at the young rooks. I remember, even
now, the sudden sense of startled fear which came over me. My brother ran
in at once under the trees, and was soon carrying about the powder-horn
from one to another of the shooters. I tried to force myself to go up,
but could not manage it. Presently he ran out to me, to get me to go back
with him, but in vain. I could not overcome my first impression, and kept
hovering round, at a distance of thirty or forty yards, until it was time
for us to go back; ashamed of myself, and wondering in my small mind why
it was that he could go in amongst that horrible flashing and smoke, and
the din of firing, and cawing rooks, and falling birds, and I could not.
